



Mediating Faith and Power
Religious Authority and the German Publishing Landscape 



Paul Marandi
In Consultation with Dr. Parnal Chirmuley











Centre of German Studies
School of Languages, Literature and Cultural Studies Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi -110067
2025

Introduction:
The relatively newer field of Digital Humanities (DH) is an interdisciplinary field in which computational methods are used in the field of traditional humanities, thus enabling novel analyses of cultural and social phenomenon. Some of these computational methods are text mining, visualization, machine learning and mapping. The field of Digital Humanities has enabled distant reading, wherein a large corpus, is analyzed. DH had initially engaged itself with the digitization of analog materials such as physical texts, records, manuscripts etc. into databases via OCR (Optical Character Recognition). After the 2000s, DH has expanded into analytical processes by using algorithms for pattern detection in large corpora. A large amount of research has gone into this field of Digital Humanities, however not much has been done in the sub domains of German publishing and religion. It is important to note that DH does not solely characterized by its use of technology, but also incorporates theoretical reflection on the results produced by the computational methods, thus combining quantitative and qualitative methodologies for research. 
The German publishing industry is one of the world’s largest and most influential economic machineries in the world, with a turnover of 9.8 billion Euros for the year 2024. Seen through the lens of Robert Darnton’s Communication Circuit, the German publishing industry can be viewed as a dynamic economic structure, with its large number of interconnected agents with approximately 15,000 publishing houses,including academic publishers, educational publishers, religious publishers, independent publishers, and corporate conglomerates, along with contributors such as writers, editors, academics, as well as printers. Furthermore, an additional support structure is comprised of an extensive distribution infrastructure, including national distributors, warehouses and logistics companies, wholesalers, and the retail sector, which includes bookstores and online retailers, and libraries and archives. Apart from this, there are book fairs held in Germany, biggest of them being the Frankfurter Buchmesse organized by the Frankfurter Buchmesse GmbH, which is the largest book fair in the world with over 7,000 exhibitors from more than 100 countries and approximately 2,86,000 visitors, based on the number of publishers represented and visitors.The Leipziger Buchmesse is the second largest book fair in Germany with over 2000 exhibitors. 
Within this vast spread across disciplines, themes, and interest areas, publishing on religion occupies significant space. Both religious and secular establishments contribute to publishing on themes associated with religion as such, and on discrete religions. This body of work comes from diverse locations and represents a diversity of approaches to religion, from the critical to the supportive. In this regard, the publishing world stands at the intersection of religious institutions and their role in society and a wider public that is both participant and recipient on religious discourse. They mediate both, the function of faith in society as well as possible critical approaches to religion and its political importance. This research will examine the intersection between religion and the publishing world in Germany to understand ways in which the power of religious authority on the one hand, and the concerns of a labour and finance intensive sector such as publishing on the other, shape a wider public discourse on religion.

German Publishing and Religion:
Along with the publishing houses, contributors, and supporting structures, book fairs held in different cities as well as prestigious book prizes play an important role. The Deutscher Buchpreis (German Book Prize) is awarded by the Börsenverein des Deutschen Buchhandels, and counts as one of the most prestigious awards for fiction. There is also the Leipziger Buchpreis zur Europäischen Verständigung (Leipzig Book Award for European Understanding), the Georg-Büchner-Preis, which is a major German literary prize, the Friedenspreis des Deutschen Buchhandels, the Preis der Leipziger Buchmesse, the Evangelischer Buchpreis, which aims to highlight protestant Christian books, and the Katholischen Kinder- und Jugendbuchpreis (Catholic Children's and Young Adult Book Prize).
The German publishing industry is also dominated by large publishing conglomerates such as Bertelsmann/Penguin Random House, which is the world’s largest trade publishing group, Holtzbrinck (S. Fischer, Kiepenheuer & Witsch, Rowohlt), Bonnier Media Germany (Ullstein, Piper), KlettGruppe, WestermannGruppe, as well as major independent literary/academic houses such as C.H. Beck, Suhrkamp, and Wagenbach. Speaking of capital holdings, Bertelsmann SE & Co. KgaA is one of the largest media conglomerates in Germany having a global coverage and a consolidated turnover of 19bn Euros in 2024. It owns Penguin Random House Verlag, Gruner+ Jahr magazine publisher, Bertelsmann Printing Group amongst publishing houses. In the domain of TV, it owns RTL Group, which included RTL+ in Germany and M6+ in France, and Videoland in Netherlands. Arvato Group, which had a turnover of 3.6bn Euros in 2024 and is a major global player in the services industry, is also owned by Bertelsmann. Having origins in 1835, Bertelsmann Verlag had started out as a Protestant publishing house supporting the Evangelical Revival Movement of the eighteenth century.
Georg von Holtzbrinck GmbH & Co. KG had a turnover of 3.6bn Euros in 2024,  and owns Springer Nature, which had a turnover of 1.85bn Euros, and is amongst the top publishing houses in Germany. The research segment is the main driver of its growth. The education segment is also its forte. Georg von Holtzbrinck GmbH & Co. KG also owns Macmillan Publishers, Holtzbrinck Book Publishers, Macmillan Learning, Holtzbrinck Digital, Digital Science and Die Zeit Group. It also owns S. Fischer Verlag, Kiepenheuer & Witsch Verlag, Rowohlt Verlag and Droemer Knaur Verlag. The founder, Georg von Holtzbrinck, was a member of the Nazi Party since 1933 till the end.
There exist also religious publishers such as Herder, SCM, Katholisches Bibelwerk, Neukirchener Verlag, and also Left-aligned and intellectual presses such as Suhrkamp, Wagenbach. Suhrkamp Verlag and Wagenbach Verlag have historical associations of publishing left-leaning literature. Alibri Verlag has a secular position and has published many religion-critical works. The German publishing industry is also supported by literary and cultural institutions like the Börsenverein des Deutschen Buchhandels, which is an umbrella organization of the German book trade which controls price regulation and trade standards, and has the majority of the publishers, booksellers and distributors as members, deutscher Bibliotheksverband (German Library Association) which is the umbrella organization for all the German libraries, and the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (German National Library) which is the central archival library for the Federal Republic of Germany. It also has a regulatory and legal framework, including the Buchpreisbindungsgesetz (Book Price Fixing Law) which is a fixed book price system which heavily influences publishing strategies, and the Urheberrecht (Copyright law) which is essential for rights, licensing and translations. Moreover, bestseller lists like the Spiegel Bestsellerliste and the Börsenblatt bestseller lists act as visibility mechanisms in the German publishing landscape. Cultural magazines, cultural critics and book media are another aspect of these visibility mechanisms and provide literary reviews, and literary features in radio and TV. These also play a role in mediating public reception. The German publishing industry has played and continues to play a pivotal role in shaping discourse worldwide, and Europe in particular. However, like all cultural institutions, publishing industries do not function in a vacuum. They are strongly influenced by socioeconomic and ideological structures in determining what is published, what is not, and how texts are received by audiences. Religion is an important rubric within publishing under all categories, both for academic and lay readerships. Given the role of religion in society, the publishing world becomes an important mediator of a social, political, and academic discourse on matters of faith, the structures within organized religion, and the wider debate on multiculturalism.
German society has witnessed a multitude of landmark moments which have over time nudged Germany closer to being a secular society. Each of these religious-historical shifts has been accompanied by shifts in the publishing sector as well. The Reformation in the sixteenth century which saw the birth of mass religious publishing, beginning with Martin Luther’s use of the printing press to increase the reach of his German translation of the bible. The period of the German enlightenment (Aufklärung), which was a period of religious reform, theological debate and philosophical inquiry, where books, pamphlets and journals were the key media to disseminate ideas, saw the rise of reason, rationality and secularism. The Romantic Era of late eighteenth and early nineteenth century brought the focus to nature and subjectivity. The nineteenth century was the period of historicism and ideology critique. Later, Weimar Publishing from 1919 to 1933 created an explosion of modernism and political discourse. The following Nazi era from 1933 to 1945 saw an exponential increase in censorship and propaganda, where Jewish and politically opposed publishers were shut down, their properties expropriated, after which they were exiled or exterminated. The period of post-war division of East and West Germany from 1945 to 1989 saw divergent publishing paths between the ideologically diametrically opposed sides. East Germany subscribed to State Atheism, where churches were tolerated, however, marginalized, and religious expression was excluded in education and media. The post-reunification period and the digital era from 1989 onwards saw a change in trend to globalization, conglomeration and digital transformation. The first democratic German constitution, the Weimar Constitution of 1919, states “There shall be no State Church.”, while also allowing religious bodies to exist as public entities, thus making space for religious freedom. In German society, the subscription to religion has seen a decline in the last few decades. According to a 2024 survey conducted by FoWiD, or Forschungsgruppe Weltanschauungen in Deutschland (Research Group for Worldviews in Germany), 47% of the German population identifies as non-religious, or has no religious affiliation. That year was the first year in modern German history that the non-affiliated population outnumbered church-affiliated Christians. Another study has made projections that church members in the German population will go down from 54.4% in 2017 to 31.1% in 2060 if trends continue. This implies a possible shift to a more secularizing book market in Germany, which further implies the reduction of institutional religious institutional mediation over publishing.
However, turning to a history behind the above statistics, the idea of a synergetic collaboration between religious institutions and German publishing houses can be predicated on a long history of collaborations and on the social standing of religious institutions in relation to the German publishing landscape. It is a symbiotic alliance of economic interests and institutional religious authority in the production and distribution of knowledge. Economic interests and religion function as mutually reinforcing forces. Economic interests drive profit-oriented decisions, while religion plays the role of an ideological filter. When these two forces interact, there opens a possibility for a powerful control mechanism to emerge that influences editorial decisions, authors' visibility, and market access. This research investigates that possibility and uses the theoretical approaches of the Propaganda Model (Chomsky, 1988) and critical media studies.
This study attempts to investigate texts critical of religion, their distribution and reception in order to uncover structural patterns, hidden constraints, and ideological pressures that influence public engagement with and perception of the role of religion.
Literature Review
Although French-focussed, Robert Darnton (1979) shows how the publishing system intersects with religious authority and how the book market disseminated religion-critical literature.  A parallel can be drawn here to examine whether major publishing houses in Germany like Suhrkamp prioritized marketable orthodox literature over heterodox religious critique. Jeremy Stolow (2005) views religion as a media system itself, and discusses of religion uses institutional publishing to reproduce cultural authority.Stewart Hoover (2006) examines the intersection of religion with film, television, music and the internet showing media’s role in politicizing religious identity, arguing that media remakes religion. Hent de Vries (2008) examines religion’s embedded power in authoritative texts and interpretation structures. He argues that contemporary public spaces carry traces of religious ideas from the past, and religion shapes how political identities are formed. Birgit Meyers (2012) shows how religious institutions depend on controlled textual dissemination. Her argument serves as a theoretical basis for analyzing the role the publishing industry plays in maintaining or challenging religious authority. Sunny Yoon (2014) investigates religion’s role in East Asian modernization, and traces Christianity’s historical integration in South Korean society, providing this research a comparative framework to analyze religion’s intersection with modernization. Christianity’s historical entanglement with media economies has been diachronically analyzed by Peter Horsfield (2014), from the imperial canon law enforcing textual hierarchies, to Reformation-era printing as commercial propaganda. Rafal Lesniczak (2022) examines the news coverage of Christian churches and other religious actors in the German and English press, which reveals a hospitable environment in elite media representations for these religious institutions. Carola Richter and Sünje Paasch-Colberg (2023) perform a content analysis to show how the German print media frames Islam largely in conflict terms and constructs religious narratives. It shows structural agenda-setting that homogenizes the image of Muslims. Xiaoyao Han (2020), using topic modeling by LDA investigated the evolution of library and information science (LIS) by analyzing research topics in LIS journal articles. A study by Tianxin Li, Xigang Ke and Hui Shi (2025) employs LDA to systematically analyze and predict the evolution of China’s language policy by gathering large-scale textual data of 1,420 policy texts from 2001-2023 on official websites.

Scope & Objective
This research is at the intersection of the domains Critical Theory, Propaganda Model by Noam Chomsky, and media studies. It examines the ideological and economic mechanisms through which religious moral authority and market logic controls a part of the contemporary German book publishing industry. It focuses on how texts critical of religion are treated in the current publishing landscape from 1970 to present day. The year 1970 has been particularly chosen since it marked the beginning of the decade which saw a secular shift and a simultaneous rise of conglomeration. That being said, publishing actively positively shapes and supports society, and how society thinks about religion. The intersection of religion and publishing itself is a vast heterogeneous area, including advice literature, including self-help books, literature around spiritual inquiry, literature which engages with different sections of society, for example youth literature, literature for the working class, literature for women, literature for pathologies like addiction and the ailment-afflicted, literature around sexual identity, as there is a fine line between religion and psychology. It includes the case studies of major German publishers (Bertelsmann SE & Co. KgaA, Klett Verlagsgruppe, Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck, Suhrkamp Verlag, Wagenbach Verlag, and Alibri Verlag).

Research Questions:
The primary objective of this research is to investigate the role of the German publishing industry as a structure driven by economic considerations and religious authority, analyzing post 1970 patterns through the lens of Critical Theory, as well as the propaganda model by Chomsky, to reveal filters suppressing religion-critical texts in the midst of the wave of secularization and market consolidation. To examine these mechanisms, this research draws upon the works of the Frankfurt School (Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, Herbert Marcuse) alongside the Propaganda Model (Noam Chomsky, Edward Hermann) and mediatization frameworks (Hent de Vries, Peter Horsefield), to view publishers as ideological gatekeepers. Religious legacies, which intersect and clash with economic drives to shape editorial decisions, also persist in German publishing houses, including Herder Verlag’s catholic tradition with its six-generational ownership, Gütersloher Verlagshaus's Protestant theological output (Die Bibel in Gerechter Sprache), and Bertelsmann’s Lutheran origins (1835). 
This leads to the core questions that will guide this research:
How does the German publishing industry navigate the intersection of religious legacy and economic drives?
How can the German publishing industry be analyzed through the Propaganda Model (Chomsky, 1988) to identify filters, selection, and ideological framings associated with texts critical of religion? What filtering mechanisms exist in the German publishing industry that affect which religiously critical texts get published?
What are the different voices on religion that are reflected in the German publishing industry? What filtering mechanisms affect critical texts' publication, how do publishers select such works, and what framings dominate?
The German book publishers act as institutional moderators who select, filter and frame texts that can either sustain or question dominant ideologies, including religious ideologies. Books, seen as cultural products by the critical theorists of Frankfurt School including Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer and Herbert Marcuse, and their production are controlled and shaped by dominant social interests, including religion, to maintain existing power structures. What are the mechanisms through which the German book publishers are able to act as ideological gatekeepers and maintain existing power structures?
The above-mentioned research questions are framed, so as to triangulate between the connection between religion and German publishing, and the history and evolution of secularization in Germany. They will also enable a deeper understanding of the various facets of organized religion.

Theoretical Framework 
Critical Theory, a term that describes the body of work by social theorists such as Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse and Max Horkheimer, postulates that the cultural sphere is increasingly dominated by capitalism, wherein cultural production, including publishing, acts as an instrument of ideological hegemony. In their work Dialectic of Enlightenment (1947), Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer postulate that the culture industry manufactures consent by commodifying and standardizing ideas. The focus of Critical Theory lies in the structural domination through commodification and reification, whereas the Propaganda Model (Chomsky, 1988) focuses on the techniques and mechanisms of influence. They provide, together, a robust framework to analyze the German publishing industry as a market-driven tool for ideological management. In his work In Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit (1962), Jürgen Habermas examines the development of the bourgeois public sphere. It employs publishing as one of its main tools. Habermas’s analysis of the bourgeois public sphere provides a framework for analyzing the German publishing industry as a tool to control public consciousness.
Since its beginning, the German publishing industry has played a crucial role in cultural production and ideological dissemination. Bourdieu, in his work The Field of Cultural Production (1993), builds on Critical Theory and discusses how publishing institutions moderate what is allowed to be passed on to the public as knowledge. They simultaneously also balance economic interests and moral authority. John B. Thompson’s Merchants of Culture (2010) further investigates how capitalism and the inevitably simultaneous globalization have intensified economic pressure on the publishing industry. This intensified its proclivity towards ideological alignment with religious institutions. The Cultural Industries (2019) by David Hesmondhalgh demonstrates how the fundamental power dynamics as identified by Critical Theory still hold true in the contemporary times of digital technology. This work argues that concentration of ownership, vertical integration and platformization mould objects of creativity.
The Propaganda Model (Chomsky, 1988) investigates how persuasion and manipulation function through institutional journalism. Propaganda (1928) by Edward Bernays exposes an “invisible government” that forms public opinion using orchestrated campaigns. Propaganda (1962) by Jacques Ellul shows how everyday life is saturated with modern propaganda. It is not an event, as per Ellul, but is total, perpetual and integrated in all aspects of life. Later, Edward Herman and Noam Chomsky, in their work Manufacturing Consent (1988), devised the Propaganda Model which intended to apply to journalism, wherein they identified five filters namely ownership, funding/advertising, sourcing, flak and ideology, which structure media output. Das Schiksal der DDR-Verlage (2009) by Christoph Links is a landmark study of the East German publishing landscape during privatization. He has documented extensively how the once state-controlled publishers dealt with reunification, revealing the hidden substrata of dependencies and influence.  The works of historians Jürgen Wilke on the post-war German press, Frank Bösch on the German publishing industry in post-war Germany, and Siegfried Lokatis on the publishing industry in the DDR (Deutsche Demokratische Republik) where publishers played a paradoxical double role, one as reluctant state organs, and the second as inherent cultural ambassadors by negotiating censorship at various levels.
Max Weber, in his work Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905), examines how religious morals influenced and shaped capitalist mentalities. Jurgen Habermas’s work on the public sphere brings to light the undeniable presence of religious influence on moral consensus in secular democracies. In Public Religions in the Modern World (1994), Jose Casanova argues in his critique of secularization that, secularization in various democracies did not result in the eradication of religion from collective public consciousness, but has reconfigured religion as a moral authority in alignment with the market forces.

Dataset, Research Design and Methodology
This research project intends to conduct textual analysis of a text corpus including published texts, publisher catalogues, prefaces, marketing campaigns and bestseller lists from 1970 till 2025. All the texts to build the aforementioned text corpus will be extracted from the Deutsche Nationale Bibliothek (DNB). This research will also conduct critical discourse analysis wherein it will attempt to examine the intersection between religious and capitalist narratives and their formation and circulation through publishing. It will also engage in archival research wherein another text corpus will be built from archival sources such as Börsenverein des Deutschen Buchhandels reports, Bertelsmann company histories, state censorship files from the GDR, Nazi propaganda documents will be looked into to look for institutional evidence of how publishing policies were influenced by religious and economic interests. The corpus of texts used as data for the archival analysis using LDA will include texts in German language published in Germany after 1970, publisher catalogues, editorials, prefaces, bestseller lists (Spiegel, Börsenblatt) and book reviews. This will be done in 3 layers, which are the primary texts, or the books; institutional paratexts, which will be the catalogues, blurbs and marketing; and the reception texts, which will be the reviews, bestseller lists and any media coverage. Material for the archival research will be collected from Börsenverein Reports, German National Library (DNB) SRU Metadata Harvesting, publisher archives (Herder, Bertelsmann, Holtzbrinck), GDR censorship files for comparative purposes, and company histories and acquisition documents. Considering this research’s scope of texts in German language published in Germany after 1970, Deutsche National Bibliothek (DNB) has a database of approximately 1,000,000 texts available for text mining. The publisher catalogs of Bertelsmann / Penguin Random House, Holtzbrinck (Rowohlt, S. Fischer, Kiepenheuer & Witsch), Suhrkamp, Herder, SCM (Stiftung Christliche Medien), Alibri, Wagenbach with the same religion-related filters amount to around 4,000 texts. The related texts to these primary texts which will be the reception corpus include the Spiegel Bestsellerliste (1970–present) and the Börsenblatt Bestsellerlisten. This will act as a measure to quantify market visibility. The related institutional texts, which include annual reports from 1970 to 2025 of various publishers and the Börsenverein Reports, amount to approximately 500 texts. The total corpus dealt with in this research will be handled computationally by the Python Gensim LDA topic-modeling program, which will be programmed specifically for this research.
The research design is qualitative, historical and interpretive. It intends to view publishing not merely as a business phenomenon but also as a meaning-producing phenomenon. The interpretive aspect of this research views editorial decisions as interpretive acts, paratexts as ideological framings, and catalogues, bestseller lists and reviews as meaning-making devices. This research project intends to employ a qualitative, interdisciplinary approach integrating insights of Critical Theory and the Propaganda Model to investigate the German publishing industry as a cultural-ideological apparatus under the influence of the nexus between religious moral authority and economic-driven ventures. The methodological framework is historical which will make possible a diachronic examination of how the German publishing landscape and religious institutions interact across various economic and political contexts.
This research employs a computational hermeneutics approach to materialize the critical theoretical concepts of ‘ideological filtering’ and the ‘propaganda model’ within this historical framework of the German publishing industry. This quantitative-qualitative methodology employs pattern detection through computational modeling as a heuristic tool identifying the various voices on religious ideology and trends on ideological tension, exaggeration and suppression between 1970 and 2025 in the German publishing industry. For instance, the presence of a disparity between the prevalence of a religion-critical theme (eg. Kirchenkritik) in the general textual corpus, and its systemic absence or low visibility in the bestseller lists, marketing paratexts and publisher catalogues, would qualify as a heuristic indicator and as quantifiable evidence for the existence of the power dynamics, the existence of which is advocated by the proponents of Critical Theory. Similarly, an emergence of depoliticized but marketable neo-religious themes (eg. Spiritualität) tracked diachronically, may possibly reveal its correlation with industry consolidation. In this research, computation serves to map the latent architecture of discourse, thus enabling a systematic investigation of the neutrality of the German publishing industry and the presence of the multitude of voices, and the power dynamics within it.
An analysis of publishing trends and the public reception of texts critical of religion from 1970 to contemporary times will be undertaken, drawing on comprehensive quantitative and computational methods to reveal patterns of ideological filtering within the German publishing industry. This temporal scope aligns with the post-war secularization acceleration, the religious decline since 1970, and the multitude of corporate acquisitions of leading publishing houses leading to the formation of conglomerates, as shown by Peter Horsfield (2014). Annual reports from Börsenverein statisticswill provide macro-level data on sale volumes of publishing houses and genre distributions for religion-related titles, which will assist in detection of textual suppression. 
Sales data from GfK / NielsenIQ BookScan Germany will further deepen this analysis by tracking sales per title. Bestseller lists like Börsenblatt Bestsellerlisten, Spiegel Bestsellerliste will be analyzed to reveal public reception dynamics. Moreover, topic modeling using LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation) through Python Gensim will process texts from Open Library API, JSTOR journals, book reviews, pamphlets, and publisher catalogs to detect dominant latent  themes,  especially  those  themes  which  are  critical  of  religion.  (Eg. “Atheismus”, Kirchenkritik, Religionkritik). LDA doesn’t simply perform a word occurrence analysis or surface level counts, but uncovers hidden themes by using a generative approach, where it uses probability and computation. A diachronic analysis of these LDA-extracted themes such as "Religionkritik," "Kirchenkritik," "Atheismus,", and its orthodox counterparts, such as "Glaube-Harmonie" or "Säkularität-Selbsthilfe" will track sentiment shifts across decades (1970-2025), revealing how religious authority influences public discourse in German publishing.
Furthermore, interviews with authors, editors, and cultural critics will be conducted. It would be useful for this research in interview authors connected to major conglomerates (Bertelsmann, Holtzbrinck) how large capitalist-academic-literary institutions shape discourse. For this, a couple of groups have been Christian Kracht (Kiepenheuer & Witsch), Juli Zeh (Luchterland), Richard David Precht (Goldmann), Botho Strauß (Rowohlt) and Birgit Vanderbeke (Fischer) have been identified, as they are associated with publishing houses which are owned or acquired by these conglomerates, and their work intersects with philosophical, social and spiritual themes. Secondly, another group of authors have been identified, who engage directly with religion, secularism and ideology. These include Michael Schmidt- Salomon (Rowohlt) who is a leading figure of German humanism, is openly atheist, and writes explicit anti-religious works, Navid Kermani (Suhrkamp), who is a scholar of Islam, and provides perspective on how religion is intellectualized in German discourse, and Peter Sloterdijk (Suhrkamp), who writes on metaphysics, belief systems, and cultural ideology. This group represents critical, philosophical and anti-religious positions. Thirdly, interviews with authors from independent and non-conglomerate publishers will provide a contrast to corporate mainstream publishing houses in context with religious themes and these include authors associated with Alibri Verlag, and other such non-conglomerate publishers. Another useful group to be interviewed is editors, who can be grouped according to their institutions. For this, the groups are divided into editors at major conglomerates, including Holtzbrinck and Penguin Random House, editors at publishing houses which are the intellectual layer of German publishing, including Suhrkamp and Insel Verlag, editors at educational publishing houses like Kletta-Cotta, Klett and Klett Sprachen, since education is a key ideological site. Also, editors from left-leaning independent publishing houses like Wagenbach, which provide a stark contrast to the corporate conglomerates, and editors from academic and scientific publishing houses like Springer Nature, which will help understand how academic religious knowledge and ideological frameworks are formalized in scholarship.
To summarize, the methodology of this research is structured into two interrelated layers. The first methodological layer is of the historical-institutional analysis which will examine the structural and ideological conditions under which publishing decisions have been made. The second methodological layer consists of computational topic modeling using Latent Dirchlet Allocation (LDA), implemented through Python’s Gensim library. This layer is designed to detect latent, large-scale discursive patterns. The computational topic modeling will be used as a pattern-detection tool and the results will be contextualized through qualitative analysis. The computational topic modeling will be performed on different datasets, including the large corpus of German texts split decade-wise, the related reader-reception texts including newspaper reviews, literary magazine reviews, academic reviews, and the institutional-reception texts including bestseller lists, catalogue descriptions, and publisher press releases again decade-wise. This will be compared with the sales data of publishing houses to look for inconsistencies between topic prevalence and market presence and visibility, to support the claims of this research within the theoretical framework of Critical Theory and the propaganda model, that topic prevalence is not socio-culturally neutral and emergent, but institutionally driven.

Tentative Chapterization
Foundations for a Computational Inquiry into Religion and Publishing
This introductory chapter will lay the foundations, introducing the current state of research in the digital humanities, particularly focusing on the area of topic modeling. It outlines the research problem, the objectives, and the methodological approach using topic modeling tools on digitized corpora. It will also discuss the state of religion adherence and secularization in German society. It will also look at the German publishing industry from four vantage points. Firstly, it being the mechanistical whole of its parts, including the authors, readers, publishers etc. (Darnton, 1971). Secondly, the German publishing industry will be considered as a financial system where the capital flow will be looked into. Thirdly, it will be examined as a set of regulatory bodies which heavily influence German publishing such as the Deutsche Nationale Bibliothek and the Börseverein des Deutschen Buchhandels. Lastly, the German publishing industry will be investigated as a medium for the dissemination of ideas. This chapter justifies why performing text mining on the datasets chosen for this research will yield results that will further the understanding of German society, by introducing the intended triangulation of religion, publishing and capital in Germany. Finally, this chapter also examines the overlapping niche of religion and publishing, commonly referred to as religious publishing, exploring how and why it exists, and the factors that influence its presence or absence in society.
Religion, Capital, and Publishing: Theoretical and Historical Foundations
In this chapter, the conceptual and methodological framework of the research will be established by a synthesis of Critical Theory and the Propaganda Model to bring to light the synergetic collaboration between moral authority and economic drives. This chapter establishes the conceptual and methodological framework of the research by combining elements of Critical Theory and the Propaganda Model to reveal the collaboration between religious authority and economically driven ventures. It justifies why it is necessary to consider publishing as a cultural-ideological apparatus and explains how religion and capital have historically intersected within it. Taking inspiration from the Frankfurt School, it starts with an investigation of Critical Theory’s critique of culture and its engagement with commodification and reification as defining features of modern capitalist society. The analysis then engages with propaganda as a mechanism of social engineering. It explores key theoretical contributions from Edward Bernays, Jacques Ellul, and Noam Chomsky to understand how persuasion mechanisms and ideological conditioning maintain social hierarchies. A further layer of interpretation considers the historical entanglement of religion and capitalism, from Max Weber’s understanding of the Protestant ethic to post-secular theories advanced by Jürgen Habermas and José Casanova.
The evolution of the nexus between traditional religions with economically driven ventures within the German publishing industry will be traced across major historical epochs. Beginning with the Reformation period, this chapter examines the emergence of religious publishing within the broader technological and ideological revolution catalyzed by print. It goes on to the nineteenth century, to investigate the consolidation of the social legitimacy of religious institutions, and the expansion of the print industry. The following era of National Socialism is examined for its use of religious symbolism within a state-capitalist propaganda framework. In the post-war period from 1945 to 1989, divergent trajectories of religious publishing developed in East and West Germany. While West Germany reconstructed a Christian moral order in cooperation with market institutions, East Germany maintained a more controlled and state-supervised religious culture, also subscribing to what is referred as state atheism. Detailed case studies of Herder Verlag, Bertelsmann, and Evangelische Verlagsanstalt illustrate the shifting dynamics between faith and economic drives.

Diachronic Patterns of Religion and Critique in German Publishing (1970–2025): Computational and Interpretive Analysis
As opposed to the idea that publishing is a neutral reflection of society and social change, this chapter conceptualizes textual production and circulation as processes shaped by institutional power, ideological framing, and market logic. In this chapter, which is also the empirical core of this research, computational methods are used to present a diachronic analysis of a large corpus of texts published in Germany in German after 1970, including published texts, related institutional paratexts, which include catalogues and blurbs, and related reception materials, which include reviews, bestseller lists and media coverage. The text corpus is assembled from multiple institutional and archival sources such as Deutsche National Bibliothek, publisher archives, Börsenverein reports, Spiegel and Börsenblatt bestseller lists. This chapter correlates diachronically topic prevalence with reception data to investigate the relationship between thematic trends and market visibility. It aims to demonstrate systematic irregularities between production and visibility, by comparing the presence of specific topics in the overall publication text corpus with their representation in bestseller lists and corresponding media coverage. In this chapter, the disparity is analyzed as evidence of structural filtering operating through market mechanisms. 
Using LDA topic modeling, this chapter will identify recurring thematic patterns related to religion, secularism, atheism, spirituality, and critique. It traces their evolution diachronically from the 1970s to the present. Topic prevalence over time indicates shifts in discourse, such as those of explicit religion critique, and the rise of depoliticized spirituality. The analysis will reveal not only quantitative shifts, but also qualitative shifts in how religion and the critique thereof, are articulated. The corpus is also segmented temporally into decade-based slices to enable diachronic analysis, allowing for the study of long-term shifts rather than short term fluctuations.  The computational component of this chapter employs Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic modeling implemented through a customized Python-Gensim pipeline developed specifically for this research. LDA is an examining method designed to uncover latent thematic structures across a large dataset. The python-gensim pipeline is a series of processes that the large heterogeneous corpus of texts undergoes, in order to be converted to homogenous data to give the most precise results. This includes lemmatization, stop-word removal, part-of-speech filtering, and normalization tailored to German-language texts. It is important to note that Python Gensim LDA is able to reveal themes that are not necessarily explicitly worded in the text corpus.

Institutional Structures, Editorial Practices, and Discursive Institutional Mediation in Contemporary German Publishing and the Neoliberal Moral Order
In this chapter, the manifestation of the nexus between traditional religions with economically driven ventures in the contemporary German publishing landscape through neoliberal spirituality, market-driven faith narratives, and ideological commodification will be analyzed. It explores how the digital age and market logic have redesigned moral discourse, producing a cultural economy where faith and ethics are commodified. The publishing industry functions as both a cultural producer and ideological apparatus, shaping collective moral perception through market-driven narratives of spirituality, authenticity, and self-optimization. 
This theoretical inquiry is undertaken through a combination of case studies and computational methods. Analyses of major publishing houses such as Bertelsmann SE & Co. KGaA, Klett Verlagsgruppe, Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck, Suhrkamp Verlag, Wagenbach Verlag, and Alibri Verlag, demonstrate how moral narratives thrivein German society. These case-studies are supported by a corpus- based archival analysis that employs Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic modeling to map the discursive structures underlying contemporary German publishing. A curated dataset of publisher catalogs, editorial statements, and religious publications from the late 20th century to the present is drawn to give LDA results, which reveal latent patterns in moral, spiritual, and ideological themes. This computational analysis is integrated with Critical Theory, enabling socio-historical interpretation. This chapter thus serves as a bridge between theory and empirical analysis by showing how institutional power operates through everyday publishing practices.

Bibliography
Adorno, T. W., & Horkheimer, M. (1947). Dialectic of enlightenment: Philosophical fragments (E. Jephcott, Trans.). Stanford University Press. (Original work published 1947)
Anderson, P. (2021, October 25). Frankfurter Buchmesse reports 73,500 attendees from 105 countries. Publishing Perspectives. https://publishingperspectives.com/2021/10/frankfurter-buchmesse-reports-73500- attendees-from-105-countries-covid19/
Asad, T. (2003). Formations of the secular: Christianity, Islam, modernity. Stanford University Press.
Barck, S., Langermann, M., & Lokatis, S. (1997). Jedes Buch ein Abenteuer: Zensur- System und literarische Öffentlichkeit in der DDR bis Ende der sechziger Jahre. Akademie Verlag.
Bernays, E. L. (1928). Propaganda. Horace Liveright.
Berry, D. M. (2011). The computational turn: Thinking about the digital humanities. Culture Machine, 12.
Bertelsmann SE & Co. KGaA. (2025, March 31). Bertelsmann again generates billions in profits in 2024, invests over €2 billion. https://www.bertelsmann.com/news-and-media/news/bertelsmann-again-generates-billions- in-profits-in-2024-invests-over-2-billion.jsp
Börsenverein des Deutschen Buchhandels. (2024). Jahresbericht 2023: Markt- und Branchenentwicklung. https://www.buchmesse.de/de/boersenverein/publikationen/jahresbericht
Börsenverein des Deutschen Buchhandels (2025). Wie geht es dem Buchmarkt 2024/2025? Aktuelle Zahlen und Trends. Wirtschaftspresskonferenz. Frankfurt am Main.
Bösch, F. (2010). Massenmedien und Politik im 20. Jahrhundert. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Bösch, F. (2011). Mediengeschichte: Vom asiatischen Buchdruck zum Fernsehen. Campus Verlag.
Bourdieu, P. (1993). The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on art and literature. Columbia University Press.
Carrette, J. R., & King, R. (2005). Selling spirituality: The silent takeover of religion. Routledge.
Casanova, J. (1994). Public Religions in the Modern World. University of Chicago Press.
Chomsky, N., & Herman, E. S. (1988). Manufacturing Consent: The political economy of the mass media. Pantheon Books.
Darnton, R. (1971). The high enlightenment and the low-life of literature in pre- revolutionary France. Past & Present. https://www.jstor.org/stable/650404
Darnton, R. (1982). What is the history of books?. Daedalus.
deVries, H. (2001). Religion and Media. Stanford University Press.
Ellul, J. (1965). Propaganda: The formation of men’s attitudes (K. Kellen & J. Lerner, Trans.).
Vintage Books. (Original work published 1962)
Evangelical Focus. (2024, June 19). ‘Nones’ outnumber Catholics and Protestants in Germany for first time. Evangelical Focus. https://evangelicalfocus.com/europe/30925/nones-outnumber-catholics-and-protestants- in-Germany-for-the-first-time
Frank, T. (2000). One market under God: Extreme capitalism, market populism, and the end of economic democracy. Anchor Books.
Georg von Holtzbrinck GmbH & Co. KG. (2024). Annual report 2023/2024.
Gutmann, D., & Peters, F. (2020). German churches in times of demographic change and declining affiliation: A projection to 2060. Comparative Population Studies.
Habermas, J. (2006). Religion in the public sphere. European Journal of Philosophy.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0378.2006.00241.x
Han, X. (2021). Evolution of research topics in library and information science between 1996 and 2019: An analysis based on the latent Dirichlet allocation topic model. Scientometrics, 126(1), 355–380. 
Hesmondhalgh, D. (2019). The cultural industries (4th ed.). SAGE Publications. 
International Trade Administration. (2024, November 18). Germany publishing. U.S. Department of Commerce. https://www.trade.gov/market-intelligence/Germany-publishing
Jäger, G., & Lokatis, S. (1994). Literatur im Dritten Reich: Ein Überblick. Reclam.
Japan External Trade Organization. (2025, January 22). Leipzig Book Fair 2026. https://www.jetro.go.jp/en/ database/j-messe/tradefair/detail/158078
Keiderling, T.  (2002).  Buchhandel  in  der  DDR:  Struktur  und  Funktion  eines Wirtschaftszweiges im SED-Staat. Harrassowitz Verlag.
Leśniczak, R. (2022). News coverage of Christian churches and other religious actors in the German- and English-language opinion press. Journal of Religion, Media and Public Culture.
Li, T., Ke, X., & Hui, S. (2025). Topic modeling and evolutionary trends of China’s language policy: A LDA-ARIMA approach. PLOS ONE, 20(5), e0324644.
Links, C. (2009). Das Schicksal der DDR-Verlage: Die Privatisierung und ihre Konsequenzen. Ch. Links Verlag.
Lofton, K. (2011). Oprah: The gospel of an icon. University of California Press.
Marcuse, H. (1964). One-dimensional man: Studies in the ideology of advanced industrial society. Beacon Press.
Meyer, B. (2012). Mediation and the genesis of presence: Towards a material approach to religion. Faculteit Geesteswetenschappen, Universiteit Utrecht.
Thompson, J. B. (2010). Merchants of culture: The publishing business in the twenty-first century. Polity Press.
Richter, C., & Paasch-Colberg, S. (2023). Media representations of Islam in Germany. A comparative content analysis of German newspapers over time. Social Sciences & Humanities Open.
Stolow, J. (2005). Religion and/as media. Theory, Culture & Society. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0263276405054993
Weber, M. (2002). The Protestant ethic and the “spirit” of capitalism (P. Baehr & G. C. Wells, Trans.). Penguin Books. (Original work published 1905)
Weimar Constitution. (1919). Die Verfassung des Deutschen Reichs (Weimarer Reichsverfassung).
Wilke, J. (Ed.). (1999). Mediengeschichte der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Böhlau Verlag.
Yoon, S. (2014). Asian modernization and mediatization of religion. Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies.

—————————
